I've seen patients cooking a meal in
their sleep driven in their sleep
committed crimes in their sleep so what
is the story of Kenneth Parks he drove
several miles to his in-law's house
bludgeoned his mother-in-law to death
and then tried to kill his father-in-law
but it was deemed he was sleepwalking
and he was actually acquitted that's
crazy Dr guy leser is a leading
neurologist in sleep physician at one of
Europe's largest Leep clinics and with
over 25,000 studies of over 100,000
patients his pioneering research and
sleep medicine has provided the answers
we need to improve our sleep so many
people are chronically sleep deprived
30% will experience insomnia and 80% of
people in the UK don't know that they've
got sleep annea this is the problem but
the majority can be helped so let's get
into that is there such a thing as
healthy sleep somewhere between 7 and 8
and 1 half hours a night now what's
difficult to explain is why your Ora
mortality goes up if you're sleeping
more than 8 and 1 half hours is there a
link between sleep deprivation and
weight gain increases so even a single
night of sleep deprivation can result in
a dramatic increase in calorie intake
and that's because what hope would you
offer insomniacs there are very
effective treatments for insomnia for
example if you we know that helps about
80% of individuals are you a fan of
sleep tablets as a general r no because
there are many non-d drug-based
techniques what are these techniques to
improve our sleep the gold standard
treatment now is
guy why do we dream that's a really
important question the honest answer
is we've just hit 6 million subscribers
on the DI of a SE um so me and my team
would like to do something we've never
done before as little thank you and
we're calling it The dire of a SEO
subscriber raffle and here is how it
works every episode this month we're
going to pick three current subscribers
at random and we'll send one of you a
1,000 voucher one of you tickets to come
and watch the D SE behind the scenes
live with our team and one of you will
have a 10-minute phone call with me to
discuss whatever you want to talk about
if you're a subscriber you're in the
raffle thank you from the bottom of my
heart for allowing me to do something
that me and my team love doing so much
it is the greatest honor of my lifetime
and I hope it I hope it continues uh off
into the Future Let's get to the
[Music]
episode
guy should I say doct
guy what is it that is at the very sort
of heart of your personal curiosity
because as I look at your work and how
what you've committed your career to
there seems to be a bit of a through
line as to sort of the subject matters
that have captured
you so I've always been fascinated why
we are the way that we are and obviously
from a scientific perspective the core
of that is our brain and in the course
of my clinical practice I come across a
a whole host of individuals who really
sit at the extremes of The Human
Experience you know people who are
sometimes afflicted by very serious
neurological conditions who experience
the world in a very different way to how
we do so really the the at the core of
what I do particularly in the public
facing work that I do it's looking at
those people at the extremes of The
Human Experience and trying to work out
what it tells us about all of us about
how we all work when you say the
extremes of The Human Experience what
does what does that mean so individuals
who have who see the world in a very
different way experience the world in a
very different way understand the world
in a very different way so you know from
when it comes to individuals who have
very extreme Sleep Disorders to
individuals in whom their perception of
reality is very different from our own
or to people who behave in a very
different way so when it comes to things
like uh aggression or um the way their
relationship with food or um their
personality traits I think in in every
area of clinical neurology you see
individuals in whom something has
happened to their brain that
fundamentally changes the way they see
the world interpret the world or behave
within that world and what's your sort
of day-to-day and and if you if I was to
take a look at your CV what would I see
on your CV I uh studied medicine at
Oxford and then at Imperial uh and very
early on in my career started training
in the world of Neurology did a PhD at
Imperial in Cambridge what is neurology
neurology is the clinical study of the
brain so the brain in its disease state
so we see individuals with epilepsy with
Parkinson's disease with nerve problems
um with certain types of sleep disorders
basically any disease or disorder that
influences how the brain and the nervous
system works so I did a PhD at Imperial
and Cambridge looking at the genetics of
epilepsy and then started working uh as
an NHS consultant in
2010 and you're a consultant of neur um
neurology and sleep medicine that's
right yeah I've never heard the phrase
sleep medicine before well sleep
medicine has been around for a long time
um I was very lucky in the early on in
my training period I rotated through a
hospital where one of my now colleagues
had come from the United States he'd
been based in La where sleep medicine
was really starting out and he'd set up
a a sleep medicine unit and that was at
St Thomas's Hospital in London opposite
the house of parliament um and certainly
over the last 20 or 30 years this been a
really exploding area of uh of medicine
uh partly mirrored by the fact that we
are much more aware of the impact of
sleep on a range of biological and U
mental health issues um but actually in
the world of Neurology there are many
sleep disorders that have their basis in
the brain conditions like narpy like
people who Sleepwalk or act out their
dreams people who have uh episodes at
night that may or may not reflect
certain types of epilepsy so that's
really the primary focus of my work now
between 2013 and 2023 you ran gu St
Thomas's Hospital Sleep Disorder Center
that's right yeah what is that so the
the Sleep Disorder Center is probably
one of the largest sleep disorder
centers in Europe actually so we have 10
inpatient beds so every night 10 people
are brought into the Sleep laboratory
and we study their sleep it's got uh now
about 15 Consultants that's got a staff
of about 50 people and we see a range of
people with conditions like sleep apnea
which is where people stop breathing at
night and then some of the conditions
that I I've talked about conditions like
restless leg syndrome extreme
sleepwalking narcolepsy and other
related issues how many patients have
you had in your sleep disorder Center
that you've studied gosh uh an awful lot
so we do about
2,500 sleep studies a year and we've
been going for well a long time sort of
15 20 years so every year we see about
uh 10,000 patients in total so very very
large numbers if you had to estimate how
many you've seen I I I would imagine
somewhere in the region of upward of
100,000 if we're talking about 10,000
patients a year and and how many sleep
studies have you conducted in that
Center so we've been at the current site
with 10 beds for about 10 years mhm um
and so we're probably talking about 25
5,000 studies why sleep of all the
things that you could commit so much of
your time to because it appears you've
been really thinking and working on the
subject matter of sleep for about sort
20 OD years two decades roughly yeah
something like that yeah what why well I
think the first thing is is that um we
spend a third of Our Lives doing it and
yet we whatever people like me will tell
you we still understand relatively
little about it we understand relatively
little about you know what it's for
um what it does to our biology obviously
that's changing very very quickly now um
it's uh it has a great deal of overlap
with the world of clinical neurology so
I also do uh I do Specialist Clinic
specialist clinics in epilepsy and I do
specialist uh clinics in in general
neurology so and and sleep and the Brain
intersect every single level of course
you know it's not me saying this but a
famous statement is sleep is of the
brain by the brain and for the brain
it's in intimately linked to every
aspect of how our brain works so one of
the really exciting things is that
because it's a relatively new area our
understanding of it is exploding in ways
that are not paralleled across other
areas of clinical
medicine is it important is it important
yeah um I I think it is of fundamental
importance you know the fact is that if
sleep wasn't important it would be a
very stupid thing for evolution to
create in us the fact that we are
essentially SL Switched Off from our
external environment for a third of our
lives and actually there's a whole host
of evidence when you look at how um
certain animals have developed the
ability to be able to sleep with only
half their brain at a time you know
animals like aquatic mammals or certain
Birds dolphin and dolphins that very
much suggests well you know that must be
of great importance if it's if sleep is
um a risk for our survival because if
you're an aquatic mamal like a dolphin
and you're sleeping and you're unable to
surface or unable to see what predators
are around you that the that the the
evolution has designed a system whereby
it enables you to sleep with half of
your brain at a time so that in and of
itself tells us it's important the the
the the fact that the Circadian rhythm
so that 24-hour cycle that a whole host
of biological rhythms have is so
intrinsically linked to life itself that
actually every single um life form
exhibits features of this 24-hour
circadian rhythm tells us that this was
something that was prioritized at a very
very early stage in life's Evolution on
Earth so yes it's important and over the
last few years we've understand
understood precisely why it's important
I say precisely but we know that it's
important for pretty much every aspect
of our waking lives be it our immune
system be it our um cardiovascular
system or blood pressure risk of
diabetes um mental health so depression
and anxiety even how we perceive pain so
it really is fundamental to every system
that we uh rely on during our waking
Lives having seen you know thousands and
thousands and thousands of people that
struggle with sleep that have been sent
to your Center do you think the the
average person on the
street over or underestimates the
importance of sleep in their day-to-day
life well I think it's changing I think
it was not that long ago where you know
comments like sleep is for wimps uh Was
Heard fairly frequently and that there
were some bragging rights associated
with how little you sleep I think that
there has been a transformation over the
last sort of 15 or 20 years whereby
people have become much more aware of
how important sleep a sleep is and have
started prioritizing it a little bit so
you think where do you think we stand
then overestimate underestimate I think
that there is still in the general
population an underestimation of how
important sleep is but I think there are
certain uh segments of the population
that are much more aware of it and
perhaps even dare I say overestimate it
overestimate it yes I think so I I think
that there is a danger at the current
time that we tend to obsessional IE
about sleep and um and think that it is
the the the be all and end all it's of
course part of normal life for our sleep
to fluctuate depending on what's going
on in our external and our internal
lives and I think the danger is that if
you overemphasize the important of
importance of getting eight or eight and
a half hours sleep every night then you
actually uh risk problems later down the
line exacerbating things like insomnia
can you give me an overview of the
current state of sleep in terms of the
percentages stats of people that are
struggling with their sleep the variety
of ways that we struggle with our sleep
the different disorders associated with
with our sleep and just like a breakdown
of society at large is current sleep
health so we think that about 20% of the
adult population are chronically sleep
deprived so that they are not sleeping
enough and that's largely as a result of
Lifestyle factors and lack of
prioritization of sleep we think we know
that about 30% of the adult population
in any one year will experience a period
of insomnia so insomnia is different
from chronic sleep deprivation insomnia
is the the state whereby you want to
sleep where you're lying in bed and you
can't sleep which is very different from
you know burning the candle at both ends
and about 10% of the adult population
will have chronic insomnia so that's an
ongoing issue with
not being able to sleep for more than 3
months at a time so you know very very
high numbers there are some other sleep
disorders that are incredibly common so
a condition called obstructive sleep
apnea which is essentially a part of the
spectrum of of snoring but in
obstructive sleep apnea your Airway
Narrows uh you have difficulty breathing
it partially obstructs and you have
recurrent brief Awakenings sometimes
that you're not aware of that disrupt
your sleep
and estimates were vary wildly depending
on where in the world that they've been
done but I think you know our best guess
is something like 10 to 12% of adult
males experience sleep apnea clinically
significant sleep apnea and somewhere in
the region of about 6% of of women
experience clinically significant sleep
apnea so we're talking about very very
large numbers and the majority of
individuals with sleep apne are
undiagnosed so it's estimated that about
80% of people in the UK with with sleep
apnea don't know that they've got sleep
apnea and I've never seen anybody about
sleep apnea there are other conditions
like um restless leg syndrome which is a
neurological disorder whereby people
experience an urge to move a fidgetiness
in their usually their legs although it
can affect other body parts as well um
that can give rise to very huge
difficulties getting off to sleep and
actually staying asleep because a lot of
these individuals kick at night when
they are asleep and kick themselves
awake and that probably affects
somewhere in the region of about 5% of
the adult population even sleepwalking 1
to 2% of the population so lots and lots
of these conditions very very
common how many of the people that walk
in your sleep center do you think could
be helped and could you help well I
think the majority can be helped um a
cure is something different but the
majority can be helped in some shape or
form and if and if we talk about getting
someone that has walked in your clinic
with some kind of sleep disorder to a
state where they are a healthy sleeper
what kind of percentage do you think
well I think it's important to to
precede what I say by the fact that
actually we don't see many people with
insomnia we tend to divert people with
what we term primary insomnia or or or
insomnia without any underlying causes
to assist a service if you look at
insomnia chronic insomnia as a whole we
know that there are some very good
treatments for chronic insomnia and
actually most of those treatments are
focused on non-drug based treatments
psychological based treatments and we
know that those kind of treatments will
significantly improve sleep in up to
about 80% of individuals so that's a
very large number actually and there are
other treatments available it doesn't
just rely on these non-drug based
treatments there are some conditions
like for example
narcolepsy which is what's narpy so
narcolepsy is a a brain disorder that is
triggered by your immune system is that
where you fall asleep during the day
when you fall asleep very very quickly
during the day you're excessively sleepy
you have very vivid dreams you will
often hallucinate as you drift off to
sleep or as you wake up you'll
experience something called sleep
paralysis where you wake up and you feel
that you are completely paralyzed you
cannot move and a lot of these
individuals also experience a condition
called cataplexy which is where usually
with strong emotion like laughter
sometimes it can be the telling of a
joke and they lose muscle strength and
will sometimes collapse to the ground so
it's a very pure neurological disorder
because we know precisely where that
area of immune attack occurs within the
brain and it knocks out a very small
number of brain cells to generate this
this is a you know once you have it at
the moment it's a lifelong condition but
actually it can be treated there are
many treatments available and even in
the Last 5 Years or there have been many
new treatments that have become
available so actually all of these
conditions are treatable they're
manageable um they're not necessarily
all curable is there something at the
heart of culture and how we're living
that's causing so many of us to struggle
with sleep the way that modern society
is at the moment certainly I think is
rather conducive to insomnia in fact you
know when uh researchers have looked at
um at pre-industrialized societies so
you know for example um tribes in um in
Eastern Africa or in South America
actually insomnia is relatively rare and
some of these tribes don't even have the
word for insomnia so I think that
certainly insomnia seems to be
correlated with the changes that have
occurred in our in our society sleep
apnea is often associated with weight
gain and obviously that is very much a
function of our modern societies so yes
undoubtedly some of these conditions can
be attributed to the way that we lead
Our Lives some has anybody ever put like
a sleep tracker on a tribe yes that has
been done there's a chap called Jerry
seagull who is based in the east coast
in one of the ivy league universities
who has spent his life doing that and
what did he find out so he found out
that actually sleep does vary a little
bit according to the seasons that uh
they don't necessarily sleep all the way
through the night but actually their
sleep is rather different to the sleep
of modern society in what way they will
not necessarily so this view that we
sleep when it gets dark and or used to
sleep when it gets dark and wake up at
dawn is incorrect um that they uh that
there is some fluctuation between the
seasons but not
necessarily um uh you know directly
related to the number of hours of
daylight and that insomnia is relatively
rare when so that are they waking up in
the middle of the night then uh I I
think it's normal to wake up in the
middle of the night that we all wake up
in the middle of the night it's very
rare that you uh for example do a sleep
study on somebody and you don't see
periods of awake in the middle of the
night it's normal to be awake for up to
about 30 minutes over the course of the
night that in itself is not a marker of
pathological
sleep when I say awake I mean I mean I
guess I mean getting up and walking
around and stuff but yeah I mean I think
that there are some individuals that do
that there's a there's a a chap called
Robert eirk who has spent a great deal
of time looking at Medieval texts and
seeing how they described sleep and he
has put forward a hypothesis that in
medieval times uh people would have a
first sleep and a second sleep now I
think that that theory is not
universally accepted but certainly for
some individuals getting up and walking
around is is you know certainly within
the Realms of normality I I think there
are different sleep hands if you look
for example at um Mediterranean Europe
the Siesta culture so people sleeping
for an hour or two at lunchtime but
sleeping slightly less at night so um
there are a range of sleep patterns that
sit within the spectrum of normality for
human beings is there such a thing as a
healthy sleep as in you know see these
sort of different sleep behaviors and
such but is there from a neurology
standpoint or clinical standpoint a
perfect sleep or a perfect sleeping
habit or you know right so I think the
first thing to say is that sleep is
different for everyone we know that
there are genetic factors uh that
influence for example your timing of
sleep your circadian rhythm whether or
not you're a uh a morning lck or an
evening hour there are also genetic U
influences over how much sleep we need
so for example there are one or two
families that I've seen in my clinical
career in whom every single member of
that family sleeps for 4 hours a night
and has no ill effects and does not seem
to have any long-term consequences from
that they don't feel tired they there's
no evidence that they're doing their
physical health any harm and there have
been some genes that have been
identified that Define that trait now
it's a rare trait and I wouldn't suggest
that most people who are sleeping 4
hours a night think oh I must be
genetically blessed because the reality
is probably somewhat different so I
think that in answer to your specific
question is there a perfect night's
sleep no there isn't because it depends
on the nature of who you are and what
your genetic inheritance is but but
certainly we can say on a population
basis well you know sleeping somewhere
between 7 and 8 and 1/ half hours a
night if you look and a stress on a
population basis we see ill effects in
terms of sleeping less than 7 hours or
sleeping more than 8 and a half hours if
you look at for example all cause
mortality or if you look at
cardiovascular disease now there are
various potential explanations for that
um certainly if you're sleeping
relatively little um you uh we can see
that there are changes in terms of how
your physiological system works that
might give rise to things like blood
pressure issues weight gain
cardiovascular disease stroke those
kinds of things what's a little bit more
difficult to explain is why your
mortality and other uh ill health goes
up if you're sleeping more than about 8
and 1 half hours and I think that that
is probably a much more complicated
picture in that we know that there are
certain drugs that people will be on and
when you're on drugs that's a marker
that your health is not necessarily 100%
already that will make you a bit more
drowsy than you normally are and will
extend your sleep time it may be that
you have a sleep disorder which is
causing you to sleep more but there's an
another interesting potential
explanation in that we know that for
example in certain diseases of the brain
there are changes to your sleep many
years before sometimes even decades
before for a really good example of that
is Parkinson's disease so we know that
in people with Parkinson's disease many
individuals will start acting out their
dreams at night sometimes even three
decades before they then go on to
develop Parkinson's disease so is it
that our sleep intrinsically changes in
as a precursor to certain conditions
like Alzheimer's disease and there is
some emerging evidence now that actually
a change in your sleeping patterns
either in terms of How Deeply you sleep
how long you sleep whether or not you
nap during the day that may be a what we
term a prodromal feature of Alzheimer's
disease do you see anything interesting
happen when someone has a baby in terms
of their I was wondering this the other
day cuz I have a friend who's had um a
couple of kids and I was looking at
their sleep tracker and it seems like
they have this inherent ability to
survive now that they've had kids on
like no sleep I was wondering if there's
some sort of evolutionary mechanism that
makes parents I don't know require less
sleep yeah I'm not sure I can
specifically answer that I've certainly
seen a lot of people whose sleep has
gone to pots after they've had kids and
you know a lot of people say that their
sleep has never returned to normal after
they've survived having a couple of kids
um but you know what you have to
remember is that the brain is a
remarkable organ in that it has all of
these adaptive mechanisms that enable us
to cope with changes in our
circumstances changes in our environment
so if you put put somebody in a sleep
deprived State sleep also changes so
what what the brain does is it
prioritizes the very deepest stages of
sleep stage three slow wave sleep over
other stages of sleep and you know what
we can see that in the sleep lab so if
somebody's very sleep deprived before
they come in and we put them in the
sleep lab we see a sort of huge increase
in their slow wave sleep which is the
stage of sleep that's most associated
with restoration with healing with
feeling uh feeling more refreshed than
other stages of sleep like for example
REM sleep or dreaming sleep so the brain
is prioritizing restoration faster than
it would because the person sleep
deprived absolutely yeah
H so what is the you as you were saying
there you've seen families that just
require 4 hours sleep and they're
apparently great is that is that a lot
of people no it's as I said it's very
very rare very rare cuz I've looked at
people sleep trackers before and I've
been astonished by how little sleep they
seem to require but how active and great
they seem to feel and I've and I I had
this the other day cuz one of my fellow
dragons I said this to her she requires
very little sleep but then she gets up
at 5 a.m. and goes for like a 10m run
and I was like I was looking at her
sleep tracker thinking you've been in
bed for like 5 hours and you are
extremely more awake and energetic than
I am and you just did a 10mile run and
I'll go in bed for seven hours
and my it says that my you know stage
three stage four sleep is higher than
hers but for some reason she's like you
know bouncing into the room well I I
think there's two explanations for that
the first is um maybe she is one of
these genetically short sleepers
although as I said that seems rather
unlikely I think the other explanation
is we we know that that you know I
talked a little bit about how genes
influence our sleep we know that there
are genes that influence how resistant
you are to the effects of sleep
deprivation uh and what I mean by that
is that there are there seem to be some
individuals who don't feel or or who
feel less sleepy than other people when
they are sleep deprived but that may be
separate from the cognitive effects of
sleep deprivation so she might just not
feel it she might not just feel it but
she may exhibit those cognitive effects
of sleep deprivation in the same way as
you or or I for example she's 10 years
older than me as well does that have
well I think that certainly we do see
some reduction in sleep requirement as
we get older um we're also a little bit
less about less good about maintaining
sleep as we get older and that's because
the brain mechanisms that stabilize
sleep are becoming a little bit weaker
so so this view that we need much less
sleep as we get older is probably
incorrect although there is a a slight
reduction in sleep requirement you
mentioned earlier that when people don't
get enough sleep the chance of obesity
and weight gain increases how how does
that happen what's the mechanism so what
there are probably many mechanisms but
one of the the ones that is best
understood is that we know that when
you're sleep deprived or indeed when
your sleep is disrupted by anything else
like for example sleep apnea there are
changes that occur in terms of hormone
levels of of uh hormones that regulate
our appetite and our satiety and so even
as single night of sleep deprivation can
result in a dramatic increase in your
calorie intake uh overnight there have
been some studies done for example in um
nurses so uh there was a study done that
followed up nurses for 18 years and they
looked at their weight and how much they
slept on a regular basis and what they
found is that those nurses that were
sleeping less than about 6 hours a night
on a regular basis first of all started
off at the beginning of that 18year
period uh at a slightly higher weight
but over the course of those 16 years uh
18 years they put on much more weight
than other groups so there is a very
clear correlation between sleep duration
Sleep Quality and weight gain we see
that for example in individuals who we
treat with sleep apnea so one of the
treatments for sleep apnea is a mask
like device that you wear that stops
your Airway from closing down at night
and and for some very overweight
individuals actually when you treat
their sleep apnea they do manage to
successfully lose weight where in the
past they found it absolutely impossible
to do
so okay so if I'm underslept I'm more
likely to eat more calories the next day
yes am I also more likely to to reach
for foods that are like high in sugar
and bad for me certainly some studies do
suggest that I think it's also important
to say that sleep disruption or sleep
deprivation has some fundamental effects
for example on um uh your glucose
tolerance so your insulin resistance um
which of course is a particular issue
for people with diabetes but it affects
us all so if you're very sleep deprived
there are changes to the way that not
only your appetite or what you're
reaching for but also how your body
processes the breakdown of those food
stuffs interesting CU I anecdotally I
think I can I can clearly say that if
I'm if I'm underslept I'm much more
likely to eat something that is high in
sugar or well I think we can we can all
testify to that can't we you know I
think everybody has known that situation
where they're very sleep deprived and
they think oh well I just need a bit of
chocolate or um you know what what
what's going on in the brain though why
is that is it is it something to do with
the amigdala the prefrontal cortex the
like the emotional center of our brain
and the yeah I I don't I don't think we
know I think it's probably to do with
the reward mechanisms that underly our
our behaviors that uh there is something
about sleep deprivation that alters the
rewards that we're seeking but I don't
think I can give you a clear answer on
that you you also talked about circadian
rhythms if I if I was a 10-year-old what
do I need to understand about the
Circadian rhythm what it is what it does
and why it's important so within pretty
much every cell of our bodies there is
this 24-hour clock and in fact if you
take a single cell and stick it in a
Petri dish about 40% of the genes within
that cell will exhibit this sort of
24-hour cycle and that 24-hour cycle
really controls pretty much every
biological system within our bodies be
it how our liver Works how our heart
Works how our lungs work there is one
particular area of the brain called the
supermatic nucleus that is viewed as the
Master Clock it's the clock that
coordinates all the other clocks within
our within our bodies and that
influences uh not only all of these
other clocks that are occurring within
the cells throughout our bodies but
influences our Behavior as well so
influences generally speaking when we
feel tired and when we want to go to bed
and when we wake up um and also
influences things like you know when we
feel most mentally alert when we want to
eat when we want to drink when we feel
most a able to cope with work for
example um now that circadian rhythm
that circadian clock for most people uh
confers the Sleep onset of somewhere
between 10: p.m. and midnight if you're
an adult and waking up somewhere between
6:00 and 8:00 a.m. now the timing of
that body clock is governed by two
things it's governed by our genetics so
whether or not we are um genetically
predetermined to be slightly later in
terms of our body clock or slightly
earlier and we see that in families
where lots of people with for example
will say well you know I've always gone
to bed late and woken up late but so is
my father so is my grandfather etc etc
um but it's also influenced by what's
happening in our environment about 50%
of the uh definers of our circadian
clock are governed by what's going on
around us be that in terms of when we're
exposed to light so we know that light
is a very
important driver of our circadian rhythm
when we're eating when we're exercising
when we're doing a whole range of other
activities and also one of the markers
of our Cadian rhythm is the secretion of
melatonin so there's a very small gland
in the center of our brain called the
pineal gland which secretes a a hormone
called melatonin that hormone tends to
start being secreted in most people at
around 6:00 in the evening it Peaks at
the time that we want to go go to sleep
and then it starts dropping down a few
hours before we wake up it's almost a a
chemical marker of our Cadian Rhythm but
we also know that giving people
melatonin in tablet form for example can
influence our Cadian Rhythm so there's
this sort of feedback loop between our
own body's secretion of melatonin and
what our supermatic nucleus our
masterclock is doing so by giving people
melatonin at particular times of the day
we can shift your cadan Rhythm forward
or or back so that Master Clock in the
brain where is it positioned the
supermatic nucleus is in a small area of
the brain called the the hypothalamus
and is that linked to the eye there are
links from the back of the eye to the
hypothalamus so there are some cells in
the back of the eye in the retina that
are not involved in Vision not involved
in conscious Vision but what they are
involved with is detecting blue light in
particular which is the part of the
spectrum of light that is most important
in terms of regulating our Cadian clock
and there are direct links between these
cells that are called retinal gangan
cells and the supermatic nucleus so
exposure to light to Blue Light in
particular is really very important in
reinforcing or adjusting arcaden Rhythm
now of course we live in a in a world
whereby the seasons change and the
amounts of light that we're exposed to
changes so if we were on a set Rhythm
all the time that was immovable and un
unadjustable then there would be times
where our Cadian Rhythm might not be uh
might might be at odds with our
environment so there does need to be
some slight adjustment of that Cadian
Rhythm and light is probably the most
important adjuster blue light is that
the light that comes from my smartphone
uh so it's so blue light obviously the
the strongest source of blue light is
Sun yeah um but yes these kinds of
devices your smartphone your iPad in
front of you a range of electronic
devices also have Blue Light Within them
so so that's why if I'm if I'm up on my
phone till 1: a.m. in the morning
staring into the screen I'm kind of
tricking that sort of optic nerve which
is then impacting my master clock and
I'm I'm telling it that it's a different
time yeah so so the thinking on that has
changed a little bit over over the last
few years so it you know it was said
that using these devices will trigger
insomnia as of as a result of blue light
actually it's likely that the amount of
blue light that these devices put out is
probably insufficient to do that
directly but there are two effects of
using your Gadget until 1:00 a.m. the
first is on a on a long-term basis if
you're doing that regularly it will
result in an adjustment of your
circadian clock and push it back so you
will want to go to bed a little bit
later and wake up a little bit later
which is fine if you're self employed or
you don't have any restrictions on your
time but most of us need to be up at a
certain time in the morning and if your
circadian rhythm is delayed
significantly the net effect of that is
that you're going to end up sleep
deprived I mean there's also the issue
of being you know on Twitter or being
engrossed in a in a movie on Netflix at
1:00 a.m. that is going to make you
delay sleep anyway so there are those
two it's arousing it's arousing and it
grips your
attention well what do you make of these
people me being one of them that watch
you know serial killer movies when we
fall asleep well I think that that's
only an issue if it's stopping you from
falling asleep do you see because I have
this argument a lot with my partner she
she can't understand why I I need to
watch this like really stimulating stuff
when I fall asleep she likes quiet and I
need to I I tell myself I need to like
listen to something do do you see like
variance in in this kind of thing and is
there a better approach or this comes
down to
individualized approach to sleep and
that's why I'm always very reluctant to
say this is the perfect night sleep
these are the rules for sleep you know
for example there are some people who uh
for whom caffeine doesn't really
influence their sleep and can have a
double espresso an hour before bed and
still have no problems getting off to
sleep for most of us that's not the case
um if you are somebody who can watch
something very stimulating very scary
and then switch it off and roll over and
go off to sleep then I I guess that's
not a problem for you for most people
that's probably not the best thing to be
doing at night I think that longterm one
of the issues is with all of these kinds
of activities in bed at night before you
go off to sleep is that they weaken the
psychological associations between bed
and sleep and so if you start
associating bed being a place where
you're mentally active where you're
engaged then if you have an underlying
predisposition to insomnia for example
then that can sometimes set the stage
for developing insomnia later on the
average person that you've treated
worked with in your clinical practice
that's struggling with sleep is at the
heart of the issue just poor sort of
sleep hygiene like you've said there
yeah because I've got so many friends
that say to me that they struggle with
their sleep um many of them have
struggled with it for years and I I
doubt that there's some sort of genetic
reason why this many people are
struggling with sleep so I imagine it's
just some kind of Behavioral reason so I
think that the genes that predisposed to
insomnia are pretty widespread but
obviously you know in pretty much all
areas of medicine there is an
interaction between genetics and
environment and certainly poor sleep
hygiene and that's a it's a horrible
term I hate that term but it's the term
that is most widely used and understood
can certainly put in place certain
aspects of behavior that then can give
rise to Chronic insomnia in the long
term so if you've got very bad chronic
insomnia then suddenly putting good
sleep hygiene in place it's unlikely to
fix it but it may be that that poor
sleep hygiene in the first
instance gave rise or at least
predisposed you to developing insomnia
and what is um poor sleep hygiene if I
wanted to be the worst possible
sleeper okay in the world what would I
have to do so I think you would probably
have to uh um set up your home office in
your bedroom okay you'd have to have um
you know your TV on in your bedroom all
the time okay uh have be surrounded by
electronic devices drink a lot of coffee
late in the evening alcohol uh drinks a
little bit of alcohol so alcohol in the
short term of course is is quite
sedating it's a central nervous system
dep uh depressant but it does
dramatically um worsen the quality of
your sleep and for various reasons the
direct chemical effect fact that you've
got a full bladder um the fact that
you're probably snoring a little bit
more so alcohol's not a good thing um
you know not having a wind down period
so you
know gambling on the stock market until
1:00 a.m. switching your laptop and then
trying to go to bed uh those kinds of
things so that's you know the
quintessential very very bad sleep
hygiene what about when I eat so uh you
know eating is perhaps less important
but avoiding a very large large
carbohydrate meal carbohydrate Rich meal
before you go to bed for two reasons one
is that we know that it can cause some
fluctuations in terms of your blood
sugar and also if you've got a bit of
reflux it can make that much worse okay
what about sleeping in bed with somebody
else well I think that for some people
they and again this goes back to no one
rule for everybody you know if you've
got a a a sleep trait termed sleep
reactivity which is where your sleep is
very liable to your environment and then
obviously sleeping next to somebody
who's snoring loudly or who gets up in
the middle of the night two or three
times to to to urinate can be can be
very disruptive to your sleep if you've
got very little sleep reactivity you may
actually find it comfortable more
comfortable to sleep with somebody in
the same bed as you I was um I was
thinking the other day because where
I've currently moved into there's no
blinds or curtains in my bedroom and I
was wondering if that might be a good
thing because it at least means that in
terms of my circadian rhythm I'm waking
up at the same time every day because
I'm waking up when the sun comes up yeah
but the sun comes up at different times
uh at on different days firstly um so if
you were doing that routinely um you
might find yourself really rather sleep
deprived um in the summer months um and
also there is some emerging evidence
that exposure to light at um at night in
your sleep is not very good for you so
there was a very recent study that
implied that light exposure at night
increases your risk of diabetes so um it
certainly is not good for the quality of
your sleep and the likelihood is that
you won't wake up as soon as it's light
you'll wake up uh an hour or so after
it's got light but during that hour or
so it may have had a negative impact on
the quality of your sleep so having a
dark bedroom is really part of good
sleep hygiene as is having a quiet
bedroom that is not too hot or too cold
what if you wear a sleep mask does that
solve it yes it does I mean I wear a
sleep mask I think it's you know
particularly if you don't have good
blackout curtains or blinds in your
bedroom using a sleep mask particularly
in the in the summer months is probably
very helpful indeed does that mean that
the only light receptors we have are
behind her eyes well I think that there
was a the there were some rumors uh on
the internet that there were um light
receptors elsewhere but certainly the
the only ones that we um know to be of
significance in terms of defining our
Cadian Rhythm are the ones in our
retinas because I I did psychology when
I was in uh secondary school and I
remember reading one of the psychology
books maybe my psychology teacher told
me this I think it was Mrs ly that there
was some studies where they shined a
light like underneath someone's knees
yes and people would like wake up when
they Shine the lights there I I think
that that's been that's been very much
discounted now it it's a bit strange
though that the only light receptor
would be behind the eyes it just feels
like I don't know feels like poor design
that there's only one place where we
figure out if it's night or day so so
you know you see that for example in
people who've lost their sight right so
so uh in uh some individuals who have
lost their sight completely then they
lose the regulation of their circadian
rhythm and they develop circadian rhythm
disorders something called a non 24-hour
rhythm disorder whereby um their
circadian rhythm is on a for example a
25-hour cycle and so every night they
will go to bed 1 hour later uh than they
did the previous night and will go right
the way around the clock you know every
month or so um so you know that's a very
good piece of evidence that actually
it's those cells in the in the retina
that are of crucial importance for
maintaining the stability of Arcadian
Rhythm I I've wrote that down it I wrote
down in one recent study 40% of totally
blind indiv ual had a non 24-hour
circadian rhythm which really kind of
for me also highlights just how
important it is
to um think about my circadian rhythm
and how much impact it's having on my
whole body the the other part you
mentioned was the biological element to
our Cadian rhythms which which people
refer to as chronotypes yes and I this
idea of chronotypes which is essentially
from my understanding that genetically
we all have a slight sort of disposition
to sleep in at certain times yes and to
wake up at certain times yeah so there's
these names right there's like the
owl the L or whatever else I think I'm
an owl but that also could just be bad
habits yeah so so the you know certainly
there's that sort of genetic
predisposition there's also these
environmental factors but there's also
age in that our circadian rhythm changes
a little bit as we go through different
stages of life so you know it's not at
all uncommon for teenagers to become
more evening chronotypes and then as we
get older we tend to shift back to the
morning so that's part and parcel of our
aging biology as well so so I think that
you know genetics is really important
but so but so are other factors as well
studies in twins um suggest that up to
50% of our chronotype is under genetic
control so does that suggest that we are
likely to have a similar chronotype to
our
family we are likely to but obviously
our environment is not going to be
exactly the same as our parents or you
know what we do our behaviors are not
going to be uh um identical to our
parents or our siblings so yes we more
frequently see that for example people
have a evening chronotype that runs in
families um but that doesn't mean that
you know look we we we're more than just
the destiny of the genes that we hold um
obviously our genes are really important
um but so are other factors as well if
someone came to and they said I'm
struggling with my sleep you know
multiple nights in a row I haven't been
able to sleep I'm getting in bed and
nothing's happening and then I'm waking
up and I'm just sat there thinking about
you know sleeping and um I feel horrific
where would you start so I would start I
think by trying to understand what it is
that is causing their sleep issues
because a lot of the individuals that I
see who have been referred in with that
sort of picture assume that they've got
insomnia and they may not always have
insomnia so I I think a key issue is
that we are really really poor witnesses
to our own sleep and what I mean by that
is that we
often our experience of sleep is very
different to the reality of sleep when
we bring in people into the Sleep
laboratory it's not at all unusual and I
will almost always ask this question
when I'm going through a sleep study
with one of my patients is how much
sleep do you s you got over the course
of that night and it's not at all
unusual for people to say to me well I
think I got two or 3 hours sleep
occasionally even they say well I didn't
sleep at all and then you look at their
brain waves you look at the best
objective marker that you've got of
their sleep and you see that they've
slept s and a half eight hours so
obviously what people are experiencing
is really important because ultimately
from my perspective I want to improve
people's experience of their sleep and
what it is that they're they're they're
complaining of but it's important
to understand that what they're telling
you may not necessarily be the objective
truth now that's really important when
it comes to insomnia because it's not
unusual for me to see individuals who
you know they give you a story of very
clear insomnia but actually when you
look at their sleep objectively you find
that although they say they haven't
slept at all they've slept 7 hours but
that 7 hours has been completely
disrupted by conditions like periodic
limb movement disorder which is this
these leg kicks associated with restless
leg syndrome or sleep apnea for example
now sometimes it's very evident from
what people tell you that actually
that's not the case that they've just
got very clear insomnia so so that's
really the starting point to try and
decide whether or not you feel confident
enough in your clinical evaluation of
them that that you know what the issue
is without doing a sleep study and if
you think that they do need a sleep
study then that's the point at which we
we we arrange for that it's also trying
to understand some of the factors that
might be driving their sleep
difficulties so for example was their
sleep were their sleep difficulties
triggered by a life event did they have
sleep reactivity before this insomnia
started so were they one of those
individuals who could sleep anywhere at
any time whatever they wanted uh
whenever they wanted to put their head
down or were they kind of an individual
who the night before an exam before a
job interview before a
a presentation would lose sleep because
that often is a very strong marker for
developing insomnia uh later on in life
uh and then it's also about trying to
understand how the rest of their health
is impacted by their sleep but also how
the rest of their health impacts on
sleep so it's not at all unusual for me
to see individuals who have been started
on medications for other reasons that
have generated sleep issues for
example you talked about this sort of
obsession with sleep and I was wondering
in the case of the patient you've just
described would you encourage them to
wear a sleep tracker so first of all I
have to say that I'm not ideologically
opposed to sleep trackers in general I
think that they are really really good
for example in research um you know
fantastic for research it allows us to
track sleep in very very large numbers
of individuals and try and work out how
that correlates with whatever we're
interested in one of the major issues
with sleep trackers is that the people
who often use sleep trackers are
individuals who already are concerned
about their sleep so if you know that
you're sleeping relatively little and
you wake up feeling tired then you
probably know you're not sleeping enough
you don't necessarily need a sleep
tracker to tell you that if you're one
of these individuals who has insomnia
who is spending plenty of time in bed
but simply cannot get the amount of
sleep that they need um then what a
sleep tracker will do is it'll increase
your
concern your anxiety around your sleep
it's a very different picture from for
example using a a step tracker if you're
sitting on the sofa and you look at your
step tracker and you realize you've only
done whatever it is 5,000 steps it's
very easy to get up and go for a walk
and do another 5,000 steps if your sleep
tracker is telling you you slept really
badly and you know you slept really
badly and you're already worried about
how badly you sleep there's nothing that
you can do on the basis of the
information that your sleep tracker is
giving you to suddenly go and get a
little bit more sleep and It's
Complicated by the fact that you know
sleep trackers are pretty good at
telling you how much time you spent in
bed they're reasonably good at telling
you how quickly you dropped off to sleep
the reliability the accuracy of these
devices most of these devices drops off
significantly when it comes to for
example defining nighttime Awakenings
defining stages of sleep those kinds of
things so then you have that additional
is in the mix which is that sometimes
your sleep tracker may be giving you
information that is not factually
correct and that may increase your
anxiety further so I'm really very very
keen for people who have issues with
their sleep rather than just burning the
candle at both ends to put away their
sleep tracker and actually go and have a
chat with their GP or somebody who knows
a little bit about sleep rather than
relying on this sleep tracking
technology do you think sleep trackers
have had a net negative NE ative or
positive impact on sleep
culture I think that for those
individuals who can fix their sleep in a
very straightforward Way by spending
more time in bed so the kind of people
that I talked about that 20 years ago
would be saying well you know I only
sleep 5 hours and you know because I'm
busy doing x y and Zed and I can get
away with it I think it's probably
encouraged them to spend a bit more time
in bed because they know they have a a
very clear um very clear bit of
information that's telling them that
they're not sleeping enough but for the
people that I see the people who are
already concerned about their sleep uh
and who have difficulties with their
sleep I think it's been a very negative
impact um and I have some reservations
about well people like myself um sitting
on these kinds of podcasts or writing in
newspapers telling you well you know if
you don't get enough sleep you're going
to die early you're going to have all
these negative Health consequences
because for a subgroup of individuals
who are already very concerned about
their sleep that actually can cause
problems and I have seen individuals who
for example have read books on sleep and
how important it is on sleep who have
ended up going into a spiral of insomnia
and very catastrophic depression and
anxiety as a result so so it's very you
know it's very important to be clear
that the all of this is a double-edged
sword it's interesting with with sleep
trackers um um I can see I think it's
worth me saying that I am both an
investor in whoop and I'm also sponsored
by whoop okay but I also agree with the
things you've said so I've seen this
this sort of variance in how a sleep
tracker can improve some people's lives
and it can make other people more
anxious in a way that's not helpful so
for me my sort of testimony on it is um
I was one of those people described
earlier that thought sleep was take it
or leave it and when I started seeing a
sleep track it's kind of like that when
I saw my brain for the first time I did
a brain scan and I didn't even kind of
like realize it was there and that I
could influence it and that things I was
doing um without really thinking much
were having this big impact and for me
what it did is it allowed me to finally
make this link between how much sleep
I've had and then how I behave now I
thought my behavior was random before
but seeing that when when my sleep um
scores were down I was way more
emotional I was way more likely to eat
crap uh and the other thing that I saw
which was really interesting was that
when I had a glass of wine or two
glasses of wi three glasses of wine that
it just like destroyed my sleep and I
never knew that before and I was in
search of reasons to quit alcohol anyway
and when I saw that I quit alcohol
forever so I've not drunk since so and
then for me I have to also say there are
moments in my life where life happens
and I know I'm not going to sleep and I
don't pay attention to my sleep tracker
but there are other moments where um I
have a bit more control and that's when
I kind of tune into my sleep tracker
I've also had Parents message me a lot
and say listen I've got a one-year-old a
2-year-old a three-year-old whatever
there's no point me wearing a sleep
tracker because listen I'm not going to
get any sleep and I also completely
agree with them that there's really no
point in that situation I think there's
a point when there's something you can
do about it and that's kind say that's
absolutely key yeah so so the the the
the point of doing anything like that is
if there are very clear things that you
can do on your own to close that Loop
there's no point having information
without being able to act upon it and I
guess if you are one of those
individuals like yourself who very
clearly can correlate certain things
that they're doing in their daytime
lives with their sleep and and and how
they feel subsequently then then great
you know I guess I have a little bit of
bias in that the people that I see are
already struggling with their sleep
already and so it goes back I guess
we're completely in agreement yeah yeah
we are yeah and it's so interesting cuz
I that's been a developing idea cuz
obviously my bias is always like
wouldn't you rather know cuz that's you
know but then from doing this podcast
I've I've seen the comments and I've
seen the struggle in from speaking to
parents that struggling with their sleep
and it's kind of sometimes just makes
them feel worse about it um I think
Nuance is necessary on this issue um and
I'm sure there's a lot of a lot of
things in my life that I wouldn't like
to be able to track because either I I
don't have control of them right now or
you know um maybe they'd make me feel
more anxious there's this thing called
the glymphatic system which I find
really which when I discovered this I I
it really helped me to understand the
importance of sleep can you explain what
the glymphatic system is as if I was a
10-year-old yeah so um within our bodies
there is a a system a very similar
system called the lymphatic system so
people will have heard of lymph nodes
for example and this is a system whereby
fluid that comes out of the blood
vessels and into the tissues is then
collected and transported back into the
the cardiovascular system and we used to
think that there was no equ equivalent
system in the brain but actually you
know over the last 20 years we've
understood that whilst there are no sort
of lymph nodes or things like that there
are these very small channels between
the cells that are responsible for
draining fluid from the brain and um
those um systems are responsible for
removing certain toxins or metabolites
chemicals that have built up as a result
of metabolic activity within the brain
and removing them from the brain
substance
itself now it's like a car wash um like
like a drainage system you know like
like like a gutter for example um you
know that takes the suds from the car
wash away and puts them into the drain
um in about 2011 if my memory serves me
correct there were some studies done
that looked at that lymphatic system in
different stages of sleep and what they
described was that that lymphatic system
opens up significantly by about
60% in very deep sleep in the deepest
stages of sleep and so and so subsequent
research showed that for example one of
the proteins that was being removed was
a protein called betoid that is that is
intimately tied to Alzheimer's disease
and so the view that deep sleep was
particularly resp responsible for
housekeeping of the brain for chemical
housekeeping of the brain came about it
gets a bit more complicated because
actually only two or three weeks ago
another study suggested that that 60%
increase in the lymphatic system was not
the case and so I think that this
remains an area that there is some
uncertainty about but actually there are
many reasons to tie in sleep in general
separate from the lymphatic system into
a general housekeeping role of the brain
and I think that um certainly this is an
area that is going to keep researchers
very very busy over the next 10 or 20
years this uh association between sleep
cognition and cognitive decline in later
life that that protein that seems
to Spike if we are sleep deprived beta
ameloid beta amid yeah and that's linked
to alzheimer's it is yeah so in
Alzheimer's disease we see beta ameloid
deposition within the brain substance
itself what does deposition mean so uh
it's deposited within the brain if
someone has Alzheimer's they have a sort
of the build a buildup of buildup of
beta ameloid in the the brain substance
is there a link between sleep
deprivation and Alzheimer's do we see
high numbers so there is some evidence
to suggest that uh both chronic sleep
deprivation and insomnia are associated
with cognitive decline and conditions
like dementia it goes back to what I was
saying earlier which is but by the way
there's also some studies that have
suggested links between sleeping tablets
and conditions like Alzheimer's so it
goes back to this issue of whether or
not it's the insomnia or the sleep
deprivation that causes Alzheimer's is
it sleeping tablets that causes
Alzheimer's or is it the fact that
Alzheimer's many many years before
causes changes to our sleep and and so I
think that that story is not yet been um
has not yet come to fruition in terms of
our fundamental understanding of the
links between sleep and Alzheimer's
disease and whether or not it's directly
causative do you
recommend slash are you a fan of you
reference sleep tablets there sleep
medicine medication yeah so as a general
we know because I think that there are
um good now non-drug based techniques
for trying to improve sleep in the
majority of people with
insomnia um there is some evidence that
for example if people don't respond to
these non-drug based methods giving them
sleeping tablets alongside these
non-drug based methods makes it more
likely for the psychological route to
help but you know unfortunately as part
of my clinical practice I see lots of
people who've been struggling with their
sleep for many many years and they've
tried all non-drug based
treatment and the risks of them sleeping
so little in terms of their mood their
anxiety their ability to function are so
great that actually you have on a caseby
casee basis to make a judgment call as
to whether or not to say well I give up
on your sleep or actually you say well
look there are a number of drugs that we
can try to try and improve your sleep
and it's not going to get you back to
normal but it's going to potentially
make the difference between you you know
end up very depressed or or or or highly
anxious and unable to cope in your life
or actually get some decent sleep um and
the risks of those drugs and that needs
to be judged on a case-by casee basis
and is part of clinical medicine
whenever we prescribe any medication for
anybody for any condition we have to
evaluate what the potential benefits are
versus the potential risks a lot of
people seem to be taking melatonin yeah
tablets is is that healthy is that free
from side effects so it's not entirely
free of side effects um but it's
generally a pretty well tolerated safe
drug as far as we know there are some
specific issues surrounding melatonin um
but a question really would have to be
well why are you taking that melatonin
is there something that you can do to
fix your sleep without relying relying
on an exogenous substance something that
you've bought off the shelf or being
prescribed is is the my hesitation and
reservation with taking things like
melatonin is always that I just assume
that my body will become a little bit
reliant on it yeah well fair I I think
whether it become whether you become
come physiologically biologically
Reliant upon it or psychologically
Reliant upon it it it it remains
unanswered but certainly that you know
there are individuals who for example
will say well as long as I know that
I've got a bottle of melatonin or you
know the sleeping tablets in my bedside
cabinet I sleep fine as soon as I know
that I haven't got access to them I
don't sleep very well at all and so that
I think exhibits that this is almost
like a psychological crutch knowing
something that they've got uh next to
their bed that they can reach for in
order to achieve a good night's sleep is
sometimes as important is as important
as the biological effects of taking that
tablet I mean that kind of leads to the
non-medical techniques to improve our
sleep so you said typically with with
someone that comes to your sort of sleep
center instead of going straight to
medication as the answer to their sleep
issues you would suggest and or try
non-medical interventions yes and you
said that these work well yes what are
these non-medical intervention so the
gold standard treatment now for insomnia
is a treatment called cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia okay so
a lot of people have heard of CBT
because they will have heard of it in
the context of depression and treatment
of depression or anxiety now CBT for
insomnia is not actually directly
related to the CBT that's used for
depression and anxiety it borrows from
the principles of CBT and applies them
to sleep and it serves two purposes the
first is to try and address some of
those conscious psychological factors
that are driving insomnia and when I
talk about conscious factors I'm talking
about things like the frustration or
anxiety of the night ahead of lying in
bed at night feeling that you can't get
off to sleep and the frustration and
anxiety that that engenders of having
your partner snoring away in bed next to
you whilst you're struggling to go off
to sleep of worrying about how you're
going to be able to function the
following day or potentially even the
long-term effects of your insomnia so
those are the conscious psychologic
factors and cbti aims to address those
but it also aims to restore
normal um
unconscious factors that give rise to
good sleep so if you've spent a great
deal of time in bed at night awake then
those normal associations that good
sleepers have between bed and sleep so
for a good sleeper they will associate
bed with being a place of comfort with
being a calming relaxing place a place
that they associate with a good night's
sleep if your sleep has been disrupted
for a period of time and you've spent
long periods of time in bed awake then
that positive association between bed
and sleep is replaced by negative
association so you you begin on a
unconscious basis
pavlovian conditioning it's called um
you associate that bed environment with
being awake with being wired and that's
often what gives rise to this sensation
of having lost the switch to be able to
get off to sleep in fact some people
with insomnia will say well look you
know if I'm sitting in front of the
television and I'm sitting on the sofa
and I'm not thinking about sleep at all
I'm not thinking about bed I will often
find that I've dozed off and then I'll
go upstairs get into bed and as soon as
my head hits the pillow ping I'm wide
awake and I suddenly feel wired so
that's very illustrative of that sort of
unconscious association between bed and
being awake rather than being asleep and
so cbtr aims to address that as well how
does it how does it do that so it uses a
variety of different techniques so uses
some standard sort of relaxation
techniques to try and reduce the level
of vigilance of physiological of mental
arousal that you have when you get off
to bed but also it aims to utilize a a
variety of techniques to reprogram your
brain to associate bed with sleep so one
of the ways in which you can do that is
you can actually utilize your brain's
own
mechanisms um that drive you to go off
to sleep so that's something called the
homeostatic mechanism which we'll all be
very familiar with but not in those
terms so the more you've been awake the
stronger the chemical drive for your
brain to go off to sleep so one of the
features of cbti is to compress your
sleep or to restrict your sleep for a
period of time essentially what that
means is well if you are an in somebody
with insomnia and you estimate for
example that you're only sleeping a
total of 6 hours a night in bed um but
you're spending 8 hours a night in bed
then you for a period of time you say
well look I want you to get into bed at
midnight and whatever happens I want you
to get out of bed at 6:00 a.m. so to
restrict the time in bed to 6 hours so
the first few nights
most people with insomnia will sleep
really badly because they know that
their alarm is going off at 6:00 and
they know they have to get off get out
of bed at 600 but after a little while
they become so sleep deprived that the
brain starts forcing you to go off to
sleep much more quickly and over time
more and more of that 6 hours a night
will be spent asleep in bed and that's
the first step in Breaking that negative
association between bed and wake and
rebuilding a positive of association
between bed and sleep I mean at its
extreme there is a technique that was
developed in Australia which is called
intensive sleep retraining and in that
technique people who've got very bad
insomnia are brought into a sleep
laboratory having been awake for the
night before they come in so they come
in in the evening having been awake for
now probably 36
hours every half an hour they're given
the opportunity to drop off to sleep
they have some wires on their heads
their brain waves are being tracked um
but as soon as they've been asleep for 3
minutes based on their brain waves
they're woken up again and that happens
every half hour for 25 hours so over the
course of that 25-hour period they have
50 opportunities to nap now for most
people with insomnia having been awake
even having been awake the previous TW
uh 36 hours they will still not be able
to get off to sleep for the first few
naps but as they get more and more sleep
deprived every time they're given the
opportunity to drop off to sleep they
will start falling asleep more quickly
and at the end of that 50 naps they will
be dropping off to sleep very quickly as
soon as the lights go off um and
actually the evidence suggests that
that's a very good um short-term
treatment for chronic insomnia and in
some individuals it works extremely well
in reassociating your head hitting the
pillow with drifting off to sleep I
wouldn't suggest it for most people cuz
it's basically a form of torture but I
think it illustrates the power of trying
to get people into a more sleep deprived
state if they've got insomnia it's
interesting because much of what you
said makes me think that we we all have
our own sleep identity and when I say
sleep identity I mean a story We Tell
ourselves about our relationship with
sleep and it makes me think that our
sleep identity is much more powerful
than I think we think cuz if you speak
to anybody anybody in this room upstairs
wherever and you say what do you like at
sleeping they will deliver their sleep
identity they'll say I'm a bad sleeper
and I wonder how much of that is
self-fulfilling because I I think I've
always told myself that I'm a good
sleeper and therefore I find sleep easy
um and I've got friends who will say oh
I'm a really bad sleeper and I'm
wondering how much that's impacting
their ability to sleep and or if they
they even know objectively if they are
actually a good or bad sleeper it's just
this identity we've embodied do you do
you see that a lot do you see that how
someone sleep by density kind of
determines how they actually sleep I
think all of that is true undoubtedly uh
and I think this comes back to the
earlier bit of our conversation about
sleep trackers because obviously sleep
trackers reinforce that sleep identity
whether whether they are 100% accurate
or not um and so yes that would that
sort of sleep identity would undoubtedly
influence both those conscious and
unconscious factors that give rise to
sleep you know if you're a good sleeper
and you've always been a good sleeper
you don't worry about any of these
things you probably don't even worry
about any aspects of sleep hygiene you
quite happily you know like you watch a
horror movie in in in in bed before you
drift off to sleep but for those
individuals who are who are not um yes
absolutely that that the way that you
view sleep and your relationship with
sleep is of fundamental importance it is
again coming back to genes we know that
there are undoubtedly genetic factors
that influence whether or not you're
likely to develop insomnia so again as
with all aspects of sleep it's that
combination of genetics environment and
when I talk about environment I'm also
talking about your own psychological
internal environment I am the other
thing I was think we talked about sleep
happen here earlier on but it seems that
a lot of people believe they have a
deviated septum is it called deviated
septum uh septum yeah septum yeah septum
I've heard some people say that that's
the reason that they can't sleep and
they've gone off to get surgery to kind
of correct the deviated septum
MH what's your thoughts on that is that
is that true because I wonder I'm like
we can't all be being born broken with
these deviated septums or whatever I
think it's normal for us to have some
asymmetry in our noses and a lot of
people have a deviated septum septum as
a result of having broken their nose for
example um you know I'm a little bit
suspicious about you know operations for
that kind of thing unless there are very
clear abnormalities that might be
responsible for sleeping poorly so one
of the major issues for example in sleep
apnea is sleep apnea the obstruction is
in the throat it's not in the nose and
so uh issues with nasal congestion or
difficulty breathing through the nose do
not directly cause obstructive sleep
apnea what they can do in some
individuals is they can encourage them
to people to breathe through their mouth
and breathe with their mouths open which
Alters the position of the jaw and
create a bit more narrowing in the back
of the throat so for some individuals
who have very prominent nasal congestion
at night and who have evidence of sleep
apnea sorting out their nasal congestion
and correcting a deviated septum may be
one way of doing that there is
undoubtedly a rational for sorting that
out I think that there are probably
quite a few individuals who are having
unnecessary operations makes sense I um
so we've got the cognitive behavioral
therapy for insomnia as one cure we've
got that extreme torch therapy that they
did in Australia yeah we've got
melatonin
um magnesium people have mentioned
magnesium so so anecdotally magnesium
can help some individuals um and you
know anecdotally also magnesium is a
very good treatment as testified to by
some of my patients for conditions like
restus leg syndrome so restus leg
syndrome is this sort of neurological
disorder whereby people um and it's
often associated with things like
pregnancy or low iron levels but it's
under genetic control as well people ex
uh experience a number of different
things so the first thing is that they
get an urged to move at night um and
it's typically at night rather than
during the day often associated with
unpleasant Sensations that if they try
and keep still that sensation builds and
builds and builds until they have to
move that if they do move they get some
transient relief and it's often
associated with kicking at night in your
sleep um it's very common very common in
pregnancy um very common in people who
are anemic and in people who've got
problems with their kidneys but it's
common in the general population as well
and so uh for people with restus leg
syndrome magnesium does sometimes help
significantly and it what's it doing is
relaxing us I don't think we actually
know precisely what it's doing okay um
when you look at an underslept brain so
if I was sleep deprived what what would
the difference in my regular sleep
activity be what would you see would you
see my brain is like not active would
you see part of it not not active so we
would see on a gross level on a sort of
macro level we would see that your brain
is prioritizing very deep sleep over um
other stages of sleep at night on during
the day if you're chronically sleep
deprived using the techniques that we
use in clinical practice you would see
very little there is some increasing
evidence that actually what is happening
within our brains is that we are
constantly showing little areas of our
cerebral cortex the outer lining of our
brain the bit of the brain that's
responsible for our cognitive abilities
for example that dip in and out of
electrical silence what has been termed
local sleep so that there are little
islands of local sleep that are
constantly occurring over our cerebral
cortex whilst we're awake and as we get
more and more sleep deprived and you
know depending on how much we've used
that particular bit of our brain those
islands tend to get slightly um longer
that the periods of Silence get longer
and those islands become more widespread
so we're constantly even if you and I
are talking there are little areas that
are brain that are constantly dipping in
and out of sleep but if we're very sleep
deprived actually that uh electrical
Silence of our cerebral cortex gets more
extensive and more widespread which is
probably why or at least one of the
reasons why we decline from a cognitive
perspective when we are very sleep
deprived okay so my okay interesting
because okay so different little parts
of my brain are doing little micro
sleeps if I'm sleep deprived yes and
that from a behavioral standpoint will
show up in my day-to-day life as worse
cognitive performance maybe less
Focus um are there because I've always
I've always wondered why on an unslept
day I feel like I'm more emotional you
know people say they attest to the fact
that if someone's a little bit cranky
they think oh they probably not slept
last night there's that phrase isn't
there like who woke up on the wrong side
of the bed etc is is there a scientific
basis for that so I don't think we can
fully explain it I think that there are
certainly the areas of the brain that
are responsible for for for emotion and
emotional cognition are more
metabolically active and so may be more
vulnerable to the effects of sleep
deprivation I think um uh we it is
likely that when you're sleep deprived
there are some changes in terms of
certain neurotransmitters within the
brain that may exacerbate that um but
what is very very clear is that that
association between
sleep mood anxiety levels is very very
clear and in fact we see that for
example in people with clinically
significant anxiety or clinically
significant depression that actually
treating anxiety or depression in
somebody who is sleep deprived or has
insomnia is much more difficult that
treating the insomnia in somebody who is
anxious or depressed is much more
difficult without addressing the anxiety
and depression and so this is you know
this is really significant not just on a
day-to-day basis for all of us but also
in in clinical medicine and clinical
Psychiatry so jumping back to the point
about when we're under slept certain
parts of our brain are doing little
micro sleeps it is fair to say that the
phrase that you know we're half
asleep there's some Merit to that yeah
we may not be half asleep but we could
be a thousandth asleep or a h hundredth
asleep and you know this this idea that
the brain can exist in different stages
of sleep or wake at the same time by the
way also extends to to the nighttime so
for example in people who Sleepwalk who
do really rather dramatic things and you
know I've had I've seen patients for
example who've driven in their sleep one
patient who rode a motorbike in her
sleep I've seen uh people do some
incredibly complicated things like
cooking a meal in their sleep all of
these sleepwalking type events relate to
the fact that certain parts of the brain
are in very deep sleep whereas other
parts of the brain actually demonstrate
waking activity so the bits of the brain
that are remain asleep are the frontal
loes which are you know basically where
our rational thinking where our decision
making occurs and the parts of the brain
that are responsible for memory uh part
of the brain called the hippocampus
whereas actually in these events there
are other areas of the brain like the
areas responsible for movement or Vision
or emotion uh demonstrate waking
activity both on an electrical basis but
also on a metabolic basis as well why do
we dream it's a big question isn't it
it's such a big question the the short
answer is I think we still don't know I
think there are lots and lots of
theories about why we dream that the um
those range from uh dreaming sleep being
fundamental for memory uh for
reinforcing memories for regulation of
our emotional memories and I think
you've had Matthew Walker on previously
you probably talked about this view that
uh dreaming sleep is a sort of emotional
Rehabilitation therapy yeah a form of
emotional therapy there are you know one
of the unanswered questions is for
example why when we are born or when
we're in our mother's womb we spend a
third of our lives in REM sleep and yet
and that drops off significantly as we
get older uh to the point where by the
time you know we are elderly we're doing
very little REM sleep at all o o
overnight so this kind of Rapid decline
in the proportion and the amount of REM
sleep that we are exhibiting um has been
explained by some individuals as it
being fundamental to the development of
Consciousness for example so there's a
chap called Hobson and who is uh based
in one of the Ivy League colleges in the
in the states who was um very keen on
this idea that REM sleep is part of the
de early development of Consciousness as
we are as as as we are inside our
mother's womb and may be fundamental
subsequently to learning new things to
learning new motor tasks the honest
answer is I think that there's probably
more than one function in fact many
functions of REM sleep so REM sleep is
the stage of sleep where we where we
start to dream right so so REM sleep is
the stage of sleep that we most
associate with dreaming and it's the
stage of sleep that is most associated
with dreams of a narrative structure so
these kinds of stories that evolve that
have a plot but actually we know that
lots of people dream in nonrem sleep as
well and you can see that in for example
people who Sleepwalk or have night
terrors they will often very clearly be
able to remember dreams um but those
events will have Arisen from very deep
non-re sleep so we do dream in other
stages as well it feel it feels like
it's not a great evolutionary trait to
have nightmares like I can't understand
the basis of having a nightmare and why
that's a good thing you know I'm not
sure that that we're evolutionally
driven to have nightmares I think that
what nightmares represent is the fact
that we've had these kind of mental
experiences but we've woken up to the
extent that that nightmare has never
been completed because usually we forget
our dreams you know we all almost all of
us go through four or five cycles of REM
sleep a night and so we're probably
having dreams throughout the night but
you know most of us don't remember the
vast majority of our dreams we remember
the dreams whereby we've woken directly
out of rem's sleep why is that why do we
remember the Drey when we wake up um I
think that's another unanswered question
but it's quite clear that that rapid
transition between REM sleep and wake
means that the memory of whatever it is
that we've been experiencing has not
been fully cleansed has not been removed
now that goes back to to Matthew
Walker's theory of of of uh of REM of
dreaming as a as an emotional therapy
because you know the the argument is
that if you've experienced something
that is
so strongly um driven by emotion you
know you've had a very traumatic
experience the one of the thing one of
the reasons why you don't recover from
that is because you are when you're
dreaming about that event you will
invariably wake up because the emotional
content of that dream is so high which
is why these kind of recurrent
nightmares are part and parcel of
post-traumatic stress disorder you're
never completing that process and you're
never allowing uh yourself to achieve
emotional recovery from that original
trauma so so one could argue under the
theory that our dreams are therapy that
it's our like subconscious mind playing
through the scenario in order to maybe
better understand it and process it and
to come to peace with what happened
maybe learn from it you know from an
evolutionary perspective okay so if
you've had a traumatic event say you
were attacked by a lion you know out in
out in the Wilds then obviously having a
very very strong
emotional association with the terror of
being attacked by a lion is very
important for you to avoid that again
and to learn from that event yeah but
what you don't want is you don't want
the next time you see that lion to have
such an strong emotional response to it
that you can't do anything about it that
you that you freeze because that's not
very good for your survival so you want
to learn from these very strong
emotional events but you don't want that
emotion to be heightened to the same
extent that it was during that original
experience so from an evolutionary
perspective there is some rationale to
that what's the um the most upsetting
case of a sleep disorder that you've
ever seen I mean I've seen a lot of very
upsetting cases you know I've seen um
individuals who have committed crimes in
their sleep really um yeah um what kind
of crimes so uh was involved with
somebody who not in the UK I would
stress who uh shot uh a family member in
their sleep um I've uh seen individuals
who have um um committed sexual assault
in their sleep um but also rape uh yes I
somebody who was convicted for rape in
uh as a result of a sleep disorder now
obviously you know one of the great
difficulties is is that you can never be
absolutely sure whether during that
particular episode they were in their
that that occurred during their sleep
disorder but what you can certainly say
with a degree of certainty is that there
is clear evidence that they have
exhibited similar things that have
definitively occurred out of their sleep
but but also some of the effects of
these Sleep Disorders on people's lives
is really dramatic so um I look after a
large number of individuals with a
condition called Klein Levin syndrome
which is a very poorly understood
condition that often affects young kids
and teenagers and they will go through
they'll be fairly normal between
episodes and then during episodes they
will be profoundly sleepy sometimes
sleeping 23 24 hours a day when they're
awake they're very confused they exhibit
very abnormal behavior eating Behavior
sexual behavior and that can last for
days or weeks out of the blue which can
have a massive impact on um people's
education people's social lives you know
how they're uh managing in the workplace
so the these sorts of conditions can
devastate people's
lives in in the case of the person that
killed somebody while they were
asleep did they get convicted of that
crime that is still in process U as I
said it's not in the UK which is why I'm
mentioning it um but you know there have
been many examples of individuals who
have um who have been found not guilty
as a result of a crime including murder
um having occurred in their sleep now as
I said there is always a degree of
uncertainty as to whether or not a
particular event happened in sleep but
what in those individuals we can say is
that there are many individuals who
exhibit similar sorts of patterns of
behavior that have been clear
uh demonstrated to arise from sleep what
do you have to demonstrate in order to
when that goes to court what are they
looking at are they looking at your past
sleep Behavior do they put you in a
sleep laboratory and check I think I
think both both of those things so you
know first of all is past Behavior
consistent with what has happened on
that night in question um secondly are
there any features about the event
itself that suggest that there was an
attempt to for example cover it up up or
a degree of uh pre-planning in order to
commit that particular act and also
whether or not there can be uh evidence
found by studying that individual's
sleep that they suffer from these kinds
of sleep
disorders I am I read about the famous
example of Kenneth Parks yes which is
pretty unimaginable yes what is the
story of Kenneth Parks so so Kenneth
Parks uh was a uh chap who uh was based
in Ontario um who um apparently uh in
his sleep uh drove several miles to his
parents in-law's house 23 km yeah uh
long long way and apparently um got a um
tire iron out of the boot of his car uh
bludgeoned his mother-in-law to death
and then tried to um kill his
father-in-law and and and ended up
throwing him into a swim sing pool um
now it was this was made even more
Curious by the fact that there had been
some um evidence that he'd been having
some financial difficulties and had had
some discussions with his parents-in-law
about um about financial issues but it
was deemed by a court of law that this
happened whilst he was sleepwalking and
he was actually acquitted so this is a
remarkable story um now is it impossible
for somebody to drive in their sleep no
I've seen it myself um uh it
seems stretching credibility that
somebody could have undertaken all of
that whilst sleeping but you know in the
courts of law he was found not guilty
that's
crazy have you ever seen someone Drive
miles in their sleep yes yeah you know
I've got I've got a a patient who I
don't see anymore who I mentioned in my
book who um has driven several miles in
her sleep and in fact has driven a
motorbike in her youth in her sleep and
the only knowledge that she had was her
land lady at the time said where were
you going at 1:00 in the morning
clutching your motorcycle helmet and
she'd obviously been for a ride in the
middle of the night without any
recollection I think this goes back to
what we were talking about which is you
know are we half asleep are we a
hundredth asleep are we a thousand
asleep so in those kinds of situations
it's likely that actually the majority
of the brain is probably awake because
it's very hard to envisage how somebody
may be able to do something quite so
complicated when the majority of their
brain is asleep but crucially the parts
of the brain that remain asleep are the
bits that are responsible for rational
thinking I mean why would she have gone
for a motorcycle ride in the middle of
the night uh if she was thinking
rationally and also the bits of the
brain that are responsible for memory I
am a big Manchester United fan and I
travel all over the world one of the big
lifes savers for me as someone that
never misses a game ever regardless of
where I am in the world is nordvpn
because nordvpn allows me to watch the
game in territories and in countries
where it's often not available for a
variety of different reasons but it's
not just about football it's websites
movies that I can access and it helps me
navigate those geographical blockers and
that's why nordvpn are both a sponsor of
this podcast but a lifesaver for me and
it costs the same as a cup of coffee per
month and not just that when I'm
accessing Wi-Fi networks around the
world it gives me a lot of security
which is something that I think we don't
think about enough if you want to check
out nordvpn for a limited time only head
to
nordvpn.com
doac and you can access our exclusive
deal which gives the dire of a CEO
listeners a huge discount plus four
extra months when you sign up to a
2-year Plan and there's no risk with
nord's 30-day money back guarantee so
give it a try that's nordvpn.com
doac or check out the episode
description link below What proportion
of people that are because there's
various types of insomnia isn't there
there's not just one type of inia
um I read about this sort of short sleep
duration insomnia and then in other
insomniacs where they might be in bed
for 8 hours and sleep for eight hours
but they're not getting sufficient
restorative sleep is that it so we we
know that you know and going back to
what I was saying about us being poor
witnesses to our sleep the majority of
individuals who have insomnia subjective
insomnia when you bring them into a
sleep lab they may be sleeping slight ly
shorter than normal based upon tracking
of their brain waves but probably don't
sleep a huge amount less than normal
individuals it's their subjective
experience of sleep that is um impacted
rather than the true duration of their
sleep um those make up the majority of
individuals with insomnia but there is a
subgroup of individuals who say well you
know I sleep 4 hours a night or 3 hours
a night and they really do only sleep 2
or 3 hours night now in those
individuals who kind of have the feeling
that they are sleeping very little what
we are actually beginning to understand
is that there are some again some local
changes in the way that the brain acts
so that there are areas of the brain for
example that might be responsible for
awareness that don't switch off to the
same extent at the rest of the brain so
whilst the majority of the brain may be
sleeping those little areas of the brain
that are responsible for our awareness
at night what's going on in our
environment may not be switching off to
quite the same extent and so there's a
sort of huge spectrum of what insomnia
actually
is what hope would you offer insomnia
insomniacs because you know this video
is going to draw in a lot of insomniacs
it always does whenever we talk about
sleeps when I look at the the comments
and the feedback and the reviews Etc and
it seems that insomniacs converge here
looking for answers
yeah so I would say that um the odds are
in your favor that there are some very
effective treatments for insomnia um
that it's not always straightforward
because insomnia interacts with a whole
range of other conditions that may be
affecting you like your mood like your
anxiety levels like what's happened in
in your past and sometimes it requires a
multipronged approach but for the
majority of individuals we can make
sleep better you know one of the real
big issues that a lot of people are
seeking for Rapid or instant answers to
their insomnia which is why a lot of
people end up on drugs and that that may
not necessarily be the right approach
for you and I would really countenance
that you know the treatment of an
insomnia can in some individuals take
some time um and it's important to have
a degree of patience to try and fix this
in the long term rather than to provide
a short-term
solution what sort of percentage of
insomniax do you think recover well I
think that if you extrapolate on the
basis of CBT yeah CBT based approaches
we know that helps about 80% of
individuals really 80% yeah up to um and
you know that that these drugs do help
some individuals as I you know I would
uh stipulate again I would stress that
you know drugs are need to be used
cautiously in the right individuals so
you know as I said the odds are in your
favor you wrote this book called um you
know the secret world of sleep which is
a real pioneering book on the subject of
sleep but I also have this other book in
front of me called The Man Who tasted
words yeah and at the bottom of this
book it says it's a fascinating
important and disturbing
book all of your work seems to Center on
the weird way that the brain operates
and its patterns and how that impacts
our everyday lives but the man who
tasted words why did you call the book
The Man Who tasted words so one of the
individuals in that book is a is an
individual who is not a patient who
doesn't have anything wrong with him
he's got a condition called synesthesia
which is the melding the the the
combining of certain senses so when he
sees objects or hears objects he gets a
taste associated with them so he gives a
really good example of his um
you know in childhood his um friend had
a girlfriend whose particular name in
him gave him a awful taste and he every
time he his friend mentioned this girl's
name his mouth was filled with a a
terrible taste so he will read words he
will hear words and all of those words
will be associated with a particular
taste that has lasted his entire life
and it's been very fixed so as a as a
kid when he started reading he learned
how to to read by looking at the tube
map on the way to school and each of
those tube stations has got a particular
taste associated with it and that taste
has remained fixed throughout his life
now this sounds really very strange but
actually we know that some degree of
synesthesia some degree of melding of
our uh of our uh senses is actually
quite common that up to about 4% of
individuals exhibit some form of
synesthesia and it really I think
illustrates how in all of us our minds
and our brains and our nervous systems
work in slightly different ways to
Define our reality and it's an
exploration of how our nervous system
can influence how we perceive reality to
be and that truth may not always be what
we perceive there's another um patient
in that not a patient another woman in
that book who has synesthesia she's a
musician and when she plays music
she will see uh colors washing in and
out of her vision um and so for her
every time she hears a piece of music
that will be accompanied by a a visual
phenomenon sometimes even a sensory
phenomenon so certain pieces of music or
certain sounds will precipitate certain
sensory
experiences I've often heard you know
you hear about Rainman and um various
types of autism where these sort of
apparent geniuses say that they
see what do they say they say they do
maths with like shapes in their brain MH
I if you ask them what four plus4 is
they describe that it kind of appears in
front of them as a shape yes so so that
is a form of synesthesia and we know
that cesia is much more common in people
with autistic Spectrum Disorder than it
is in individuals without
neurodevelopmental uh disorders what
does this tell us about the nature of
our experience you know on a for someone
that's not you know um living with
synesthesia does it does it mean that
there is no such thing as truth I think
what it tells us is that
our our reality what we perceive truth
to be is intimately linked with the
structure and the function of our brains
and whilst we all assume that people's
experiences of the world and by the way
the way that we interpret those
experiences of the world are all
identical that is very far from the
truth and I think it gives us some
insight given the fact that how we
perceive reality even in the context of
an entirely normal and entirely
functioning nervous system is so
predicated upon our experiences is so
predicated on our model of the world
that you know the brain works as a
prediction system so it works by um
assessing whether or not what our senses
are telling us are in keeping with what
our expectation of the world is so we
need a model of the world as we
understand it and that model of the
world is influenced by our experiences
by our genes by the structure and
function of our brain so it's not
necessarily surprising given that we all
have very different experiences in life
that we have different genes that we
will have gone through different things
that our truth may be very different
from the truths of others and our
experiences our perceptions of the
reality of the world may be very
different kind of explains why you know
there's a lot of polarization and a lot
of conflict to some degree I think it
does I think you only need to have a
look on Twitter to see how differently
different people perceive exactly the
same
situation but also one might argue that
you know if there's people who have
entirely different perceptions of the
world because of their brain and their
nervous system
that maybe they're not guilty of crimes
that they've committed well I think
that's the subject of the third book
yeah seven deadly sins the biology of
Being Human I had this debate with my
friend the other day because I was
reading about some studies I think it
was um it was a study that showed a guy
with a brain tumor had gone out and
suddenly he was like a normal teacher
and he' gone out and committed some
horrific horrific crimes and when they
remov the brain tumor from his head he
stopped committing all these crimes and
so the question becomes like is this
person to blame for these crimes because
but then you could obviously stretch
that out further and just go when people
are serial killers often times we find
that there's something in their brain or
there's some early trauma or there's you
know there's some kind of neurological
issue that they've had so are they are
they guilty well indeed and you know and
that's a really important question which
is you know how much free will do all of
us have if we are all um essentially
machines that are doing the bidding of
our brains than anything that affects
our brain function defines our behavior
and you know the the the book that is
out in November very much discusses um
the neurological and psychological
conditions that can influence our
behavior in really rather dramatic ways
you know be that you know from the
perspective of gluttony or wroth or
Pride or any of the other uh seven
deadly sins why why did you write this
book this book Seven Deadly Sins because
it again reflects some of my clinical
practice that I see individuals who have
brain conditions that dramatically
influence their behavior now the
question in always in my mind is well um
firstly does this
reflect their own morality and it's
quite clear that in those individuals it
doesn't but what are the implications
for all of us and as you already said
you know if that is the case for if a
brain tumor can suddenly cause a
dramatic change in Behavior if a stroke
can if Parkinson's disease can if a
chemical change and some of the people
that I detail in the book are
individuals who are very similar to
patients of mine in whom I've started an
anti-epileptic drug for example exhibit
a dramatic change in their behavior and
so a simple chemical Tak in tablet form
can result in those changes of behavior
what about all of us are there things in
our environment are there things that we
are doing that influence the
machinations of our brains so do do
these kinds of behaviors then take a a
moral Viewpoint or should we be looking
at them from a biological perspective
rather than a moral one give me one such
extreme Behavior where you've seen um
some kind of chemical intervention or
other intervention completely eradicate
that behavior so I I've certain he seen
a lot of individuals so you know I said
at the start that one of the um
specialist clinics I do is an epilepsy
clinic and there are anti-epileptic
drugs that are well known in a very
small proportion of individuals to cause
a dramatic increase in irritability
anger and aggression and you know I
remember one of the earliest patients
that I saw started on this drug was a uh
very frail little old lady who must have
been in her 70s
and who um was arrested by six police
officers in her front garden um being
pinned down because she was so so
violent and aggressive so that's one
example lots of patients who for example
exhibit behavioral change after a
seizure uh I've seen individuals who
have had autoimmune conditions of their
brain who have become frankly psychotic
you know ripping um sinks off the wall
in their hospital room trashing um the
their hospital room attacking um their
their nurses who actually when that
condition is treated they've reverted to
normality and in the case of the very
angry grandmother who was uh kicking off
at the police was she cured of thator
the the drug was stopped and and she
returned to normal the drug was stopped
yes so it was took her off the took took
her off the anti-epileptic drug and
replaced it with another and and she
normalized of all the um of all the
extreme cases you've seen throughout
your work and through these these books
you've written about sleep and the seven
deadly sins and the man who tasted
words what is the
um what is the most surprising crazy
story that you've encountered that that
show just how extreme and bizarre the
human brain can be so I think probably
um the one
that sits with me in a mo in the most
emotional way is probably a young man
that I met who has never been able to
feel pain um throughout his entire life
from the moment that he was born and in
fact he has a genetic disorder that was
also inherited by two of his siblings
and none of the three children have ever
been able to experience pain now at
first clance you kind of think oh that
might be quite nice never to experience
pain but meeting somebody like that and
you realize quite how important pain is
for our normal development for our
normal lives you know he tells stories
of him and his sisters essentially
holding their hands up to the fire to
hear the sizzling of their hands because
they thought it was funny they didn't
feel any pain they he would regularly
jump off the roof of his garage in order
to get attention because he knew that if
he broke a limb he would end up in
hospital being looked after by these
nice nurses and there was no downside to
it yet he is now you know terribly
physically scarred doesn't really you
know he has no comprehension of what
pain is so there is that disconnect
between The Human Experience of pain
which is common to all of us and what he
experiences and I think that he feels
that that is very much a a barrier
between him and understanding all the
people around him but it's also resulted
in him uh being terribly damaged by the
inability to feel
pain gosh it really does um perfectly
highlight the role of of pain very much
something all of us think we'd rather
live without yes and then you see
somebody who has never experienced pain
and see the impact it has on them um I
think it makes you appreciate it in a
slightly different way is there anything
else pain oh load I mean so much you
know um there are you know one one woman
who lost her vision as a result of
multiple operations to her eye who sees
visual hallucinations everywhere she
goes um you know I think that very much
illustrates uh the fact that our brain
even when it's starved of inputs creates
its own inputs because it's so eager to
experience the world um you know
individuals in whom is she okay she
what's her experience so so she has um
lost her vision entirely and sees
sometimes rather scary hallucinations as
a result of that loss of vision um you
know what's really fascinating about her
is that when she was asked by a a doctor
whether or not she wouldd want those
treated because there are some things
that we can do to try and improve those
she had to think very long and hard
about it because she said look you know
at least I'm seeing something now
whether that is real or not there is a
comfort to seeing something and in the
end decided that she didn't want it
treated she'd rather live with the
hallucinations what else sorry I
interrupted so
um individuals who have lost their sense
of smell or lost their sense of taste
now you know you kind of think well I
could live without my sense of smell
probably it wouldn't be as quite a rich
a world as I would as I would like but
actually the implications of losing your
sense of smell both in terms of um
memory you know you think how important
smell is for memory for those sort of
emotional memories that we have you know
smelling your your your mother's perfume
or a particular meal and taking you back
directly to Childhood and the impact of
smell on emotion on your mood on uh you
know depression is really
underappreciated until you look at
individuals who have lost their sense of
smell and that was particularly
important over covid because a lot of
people were um losing their sense of
smell as parts of covid and didn't know
whether or not they would ever get their
sense of smell back so all of our senses
and they were depressed
and they were depressed and you know it
is very clearly associated with with um
changes in mood uh smell and mood are
very closely linked um you know if you
think about some of the other um sensors
so hearing so people who experience
auditory hallucinations or you know in
in in in the man who tasted words
actually I was very kindly uh Bill Odie
agreed to talk to me and bill has been
experiencing musical hallucinations for
many many many years so everywhere he
goes in his house he will hear a
soundtrack of of music and you know what
the implications of of that are um what
what's the implication so so initially
he thought he was going slightly mad he
thought that actually well first of all
he thought that his neighbors were
playing radio very very loudly and then
he thought he was going slightly crazy
but actually it turned out that one of
the reasons why he was experiencing
musical hallucinations was because he
was losing his hearing anyway and so you
know it goes back to the fact that when
the brain is starved of inputs it
creates its own experiences because it's
eager to experience life um but also the
the the the counter side to that is that
this association between hearing loss
and cognitive decline that actually you
know it's important to look after your
hearing because it provides important
inputs that maintain the health and the
Integrity of our brains so there are
lots of these aspects of that you can
take from Clinical medicine and apply
them to what it tells us about ourselves
and how our own brains work how has it
changed you meeting all these people and
doing all this work because it it can't
be easy at times it must have had left
sort of fingerprints on you in some sort
of way look I think the problem is that
particularly when you're sitting in a
busy NHS Clinic where you've got a very
limited amount of time to see people is
you're often very much focused on the
the problem that is sitting in front of
you and by problem I mean the issue the
medical issue that is affecting that
individual uh whereas writing these
books and talking to these patients I
think has given me much broader
appreciation of you know what it is that
we are actually doing so in you know in
the NHS you kind of yes you see well
look I'm treating that I'm diagnosing
that I'm maybe curing that but actually
you see the much wider implic ations on
those individuals when you are
addressing their stories their
experiences in a much broader way you
see the impacts on their families and
the the people around them yeah and that
stuff stays with you
undoubtedly how do you take care of
yourself to make sure that that stuff
doesn't um the honest answer is not very
well really no I mean you know look I I
try and uh have downtime and I try and
get away and get out of London um but I
think you know this is something that
everybody in the NHS is currently facing
everybody is feeling very very burnt out
do you sleep well
sometimes we have a closing tradition
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're leaving it for okay and the
question left for you is what is the
most difficult decision you ever had to
make and how did
it benefit you oh
God I think there's lots of ways to
answer that question isn't it
what came to mind well I think the uh
the
um I can think of you know clinical
situations where I've had to make very
difficult decisions about whether or not
to treat somebody or not to treat
somebody to whether or not to
um whether or not to give up on somebody
or whether or not to to continue working
you know the sorts of situations like
cardiac arrests which all doctors have
to face um personal decisions
um you know I think certainly making the
decision to study medicine um was a an
important fork in the road for me
because you know medicine brings with it
lots of amazing things and amazing
experiences and we see through windows
on life that very few other people get
to see but it comes with it with it
quite a lot of responsibilities and
implications in terms of the future
direction of your life so I think there
are different ways to answer that thank
you guy you write such interesting books
in such interesting ways and they're all
absolutely fascinating so usually I'd
recommend one of them but I have to
highly recommend all of them I'm going
to link all of them Below in the
description um seven deadly sins the
biology of Being Human I've got the man
who tasted words inside the strange and
startling world of our senses and The
Secret World of sleep all of them will
be linked below um the seven deadly sins
book is not out until November 21st I
believe so um you can probably pre-order
that now can interested in getting that
so check out the the description below
all of the books are linked there and
thank you so much such a fascin pleasure
talking to you
[Music]
ah